Python is a high-level programming language created by Guido van Rossum and first released in 1991. Python's design philosophy emphasizes code readability with its notable use of significant indentation.

Python is dynamically typed and garbage-collected. It supports multiple programming paradigms, including structured (particularly procedural), object-oriented and functional programming.

Python was conceived in the late 1980s by Guido van Rossum at Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI) in the Netherlands as a successor to the ABC programming language, which was inspired by SETL, capable of exception handling and interfacing with the Amoeba operating system.

Python 2.0 was released on 16 October 2000, with many major new features such as list comprehensions and a garbage collection system with reference counting. Python 3.0 was released on 3 December 2008, with many of its major features backported to Python 2.6.x and 2.7.x.

Python consistently ranks as one of the most popular programming languages. Python is used extensively in scientific computing, data analysis, artificial intelligence, machine learning, web development, automation, and many other domains.

The Python Package Index (PyPI), the official repository for third-party Python software, contains over 400,000 packages. Popular Python libraries include NumPy for numerical computing, Pandas for data manipulation, Matplotlib for data visualization, TensorFlow and PyTorch for machine learning, Django and Flask for web development.

Python's syntax allows programmers to express concepts in fewer lines of code than would be possible in languages such as C++ or Java. The language provides constructs intended to enable writing clear programs on both a small and large scale.

Python uses dynamic typing and a combination of reference counting and a cycle-detecting garbage collector for memory management. It also features dynamic name resolution (late binding), which binds method and variable names during program execution.
